My name is Judith Lee and I am a teacher. I teach people who are deaf and dumb, and I teach them by lip-reading. When people say a word, they all move their lips the same way, so if you watch them carefully, you know what they are saying.
My father was one of the first people to teach lip-reading. My mother was deaf, but she could lip-read, so lip-reading has always been part of my life. And because I have always been able to do it, I was able to play a part in the adventure I am going to tell you about…

I was thirteen years old when it happened. My mother and father were visiting another country, and I was staying in a small village, in a cottage which we owned. Mrs Dickson, our servant, was staying there with me.

I was returning home by train one day, after a visit to some friends. There were two people sitting opposite me, a man and a woman. The woman got out at a station not far from my home. Then a man got in and sat beside the one who was already there. They seemed to know each other.
They talked quietly for some minutes, and it was impossible to hear what they said. But I only had to look at their faces. I was reading a magazine and looked up to see the first man say something which surprised me.
‘…Myrtle Cottage. It’s got a large myrtle tree in the front garden.’
The other man said something in a low voice, but his face was turned away from me. The first man replied, and I read his lips again. ‘His name is Colegate, and he uses it as a summer cottage. He’s got some of the best old silver in England.’
The other man shook his head and turned so I could see his face. I saw him say: ‘Old silver is no better than new. You can only melt it.’
The first man’s face became red. ‘Only melt it! Don’t be stupid! I can sell old silver at good prices. And that silver in Myrtle Cottage must be worth more than a thousand pounds. There’s a silver salt-cellar worth at least a hundred.’
The other man looked at me while I was watching his friend speak. He had fair hair and blue eyes. ‘That child is watching us,’ he whispered. ‘Be careful.’
The look in those blue eyes began to frighten me.
The first man said, ‘Let her watch, she can’t hear us.’
I was alone with them, and I was quite small. So I looked back at my magazine instead of watching the rest of their conversation. I knew Myrtle Cottage because it was not very far from our own cottage. And I knew Mr Colegate, and about his old silver. I knew the silver salt-cellar the two men spoke about, and wondered why they were interested in it. I was very young. I did not think: ‘These two men who speak in whispers may not be honest.’
They both got out at the station before our village.

After tea that evening, I went for a walk without telling Mrs Dickson. My walk took me past Myrtle Cottage. It was small, and there were no other houses near it. I knew that Mr Colegate was away, but when I went into the garden, I saw that the front-room window was open. I looked inside. What I saw surprised me very much.
In the room was the first man from the train. All of Mr Colegate’s silver was on the table in front of him, and he was holding the silver salt-cellar. I did not know what to think. What was he doing there? What should I do? I was still trying to decide when a hand went round my throat.

‘If you make a sound, I’ll kill you,’ said a man’s voice in my ear. ‘Believe me, I will!’
It was the other man, and he recognised me.
‘It’s the girl from the train!’ he said.
The first man came to the window. ‘What’s happening?’ he asked. ‘Who’s that child you’re holding?’
The other man pushed my face forwards. ‘Can’t you see? I knew she was listening!’
‘She couldn’t hear us on the train,’ said the first man. ‘Nobody could hear our whispers. Give her to me.’
I was passed through the window, and now it was his hands that went round my throat. ‘Who are you?’ he wanted to know. ‘If you scream, I’ll pull your head right off you!’
I did not move or speak.
‘Cut her throat,’ said the other man, and took a long, terrible-looking knife with a silver handle from the table.
‘Wait,’ said his friend. He took a piece of rope from his bag. Then they pushed me into a chair and tied the rope around my arms and legs. They also tied something across my mouth to stop me speaking.
The man with blue eyes moved towards me with the knife. I was sure he was going to cut my throat. But he took my long hair in one hand, and with that terrible knife he cut all of it from my head!
I was more angry than I thought possible. I wanted to take that knife and push it into him! My long hair was more valuable to me than almost anything. Not because of my own love of it, but because my mother loved it. It pleased her so much, and she often told me how beautiful it was. And now this man had robbed me of it in the most terrible way. At that moment, I wanted to kill him.
He hit me across the face with my own hair. ‘It didn’t take me long to cut it off,’ he said, ‘but I’ll cut your throat quicker if you try to move.’
The man with blue eyes let my hair fall all over me. Then the two of them began to put Mr Colegate’s silver into two large bags. That was when I realized they were stealing it, and there was nothing I could do.
The man with blue eyes moved towards the window, carrying one of the bags. The first man put a hand on his arm, and I watched him whisper, ‘Do you remember the plan?’
The man with blue eyes put his mouth close to the other man’s ear. I watched his lips as he said, ‘Cotterill, Cloakroom, Victoria Station, Brighton Railway.’
I knew the words were important and promised myself that I would not forget them.
He got out of the window and his bag was passed to him. He turned towards me and said, ‘Sorry I can’t take a piece of your hair. Perhaps I’ll come back for some later.’ Then he went, and anger burned inside me.
His friend did not look at me. He took his bag and went out through the door. I don’t know what happened to him afterwards. I was left alone, all through that night.
I was not afraid, but the rope hurt my arms and legs. I repeated the words, ‘Cotterill, Cloakroom, Victoria Station Brighton Railway.’ I was sure they were important.
I did not sleep that night. Day came, and I wondered what Mrs Dickson was doing. Was she looking for me? I had some friends who lived three or four miles away. Sometimes I stayed the night with them, without telling anyone at home. Did Mrs Dickson think I was with them?
I do not know what time it was when I heard the sound of feet outside. The day seemed almost over. I watched the open window, and suddenly a face appeared.
It was Mr Colegate.
‘Judith!’ he said. ‘Judith Lee!’
He was not a young man, but he climbed in through that window as quickly as a boy. He took a knife from his pocket and cut the rope around my arms and legs, then he uncovered my mouth and at last I could speak.
‘Cotterill, Cloakroom, Victoria Station, Brighton Railway,’ I said. Then I fell into Mr Colegate’s arms.

I knew no more until I woke up in bed with Mrs Dickson standing beside me. With her were Dr Scott, Mr Colegate, Pierce the village policeman, and another man. I discovered later that he was a detective.
I saw that I was in a room in Myrtle Cottage, and sat up in bed — and remembered everything.
‘He cut off my hair with the long knife!’ I said.
My head felt strange. I asked for a mirror, then became angry again when I saw the blue-eyed man’s work. Before anyone could stop me, I jumped out of bed.
‘Cotterill, Cloakroom, Victoria Station, Brighton Railway,’ I said. ‘Where are my clothes?’
At first they thought I was crazy. But then I told them my story. ‘Cotterill, Cloakroom, Victoria Station, Brighton Railway,’ I said again. ‘That’s where I’m gong to catch the man who cut off my hair. And if we don’t go quickly, we may be too late.’
Mr Colegate agreed. He wanted to get his silver back as much as I wanted to find the man who cut my hair. So we went up to London on the first train that we could catch — Mr Colegate, the detective, and an almost hairless child.

We got to Victoria Station and went to the cloakroom.
‘Is there a parcel here in the name of Cotterill?’ Asked the detective.
‘One in the name of Cotterill was taken only half a minute ago,’ the cloakroom man replied. ‘Didn’t you see him walking off with it?’ He looked along the station. ‘There he is! Someone’s going to speak to him.’
I saw a man carrying a parcel, and I saw the man who was going to speak to him. ‘It’s the man who cut my hair!’ I shouted, and ran towards him as fast as I could go. He looked round and saw me, and quickly realized who I was. He whispered to the man with the parcel before running away.
I saw clearly what he said. ‘Bantock, 13 Harwood Street, near Oxford Street.’ Those were the words. And then he turned and ran away. Mr Colegate and the detective were close behind me. The man with the parcel saw us, and at once he dropped the parcel and ran off.
We did no catch him, or the man who cut my hair. The station was full of people coming off a train, which made it easy for both men to escape. But we got the parcel. It was not big enough to contain Mr Colegate’s silver, we realized that. But it did contain a much bigger surprise.
Jewels!

A London detective was sent for. He looked at the jewels and said, ‘These are the Duchess of Dachet’s jewels. The police all over Europe are looking for them.’
The man from the cloakroom was with us. ‘That parcel has been with us for nearly a month,’ he said. ‘The person who took it out paid for twenty-seven days.’
‘I wish I could catch him,’ said the London detective. ‘I have a word or two that I want to say to him.’
‘I think I know where you can find him,’ I said. ‘Bantock, 13 Harwood Street, near Oxford Street.’
‘Who is Bantock?’ the detective asked.
‘I don’t know,’ I said. ‘But I saw the man who cut off my hair whisper those words before he ran away.’
‘You saw him whisper them?’ The London detective looked at the others. ‘What does she mean? Young lady, you were fifteen metres away. How could you hear him whisper?’
‘I didn’t say I heard him whisper,’ I replied. ‘I said I saw him. I don’t need to hear to know what a person is saying.’
‘Judith is an excellent lip-reader,’ said Mr Colegate. He explained, but the others found it hard to believe.
‘So what did you see him whisper?’ asked the detective.
‘I’ll tell you if I can come with you,’ I said.
The detective laughed. He seemed to think that I was amusing, but I don’t know why. He did not understand how angry I was about my hair. ‘All right,’ he said. ‘You can come. Now, tell me what you saw him whisper.’
So I told him again and he wrote it down.
‘I know Harwood Street, but I don’t know Mr Bantock,’ he said. ‘First I’ll send a message for some help, then we’ll go and visit Mr Bantock — if there is a Mr Bantock.’
The four of us went in a taxi — the two detectives, Mr Colegate and I. After a while, the taxi stopped on the corner of a street.
‘This is Harwood Street,’ said the London detective. ‘We can walk the rest of the way. We don’t want to stop outside the door. They may guess who we are.’
It was a street full of shops. The shop at number 13 sold jewels and other less valuable things. The name ‘Bantock was over the top of the window.
As we reached the shop, a taxi stopped outside it and five men got out. The London detective recognized them and did not look pleased. ‘Now our visit won’t be a surprise,’ he said. ‘Come on, let’s go in quickly.’
And we went in, the detective first and me behind him. There were two young men standing close together at the other side of the shop. When they saw us, I saw one whisper, ‘They’re detectives! Ring the alarm bell!’
‘He’s going to ring the alarm bell!’ I shouted.
The men from the other taxi were also detectives.
They came in quickly and held each of the two young men.
There was a door at the end of the shop which the London detective opened. ‘Stairs,’ he said. ‘We’ll go up. You men wait here until you’re wanted.’
I followed him up the stairs. At the top were two more doors. I could hear voices coming from behind one of them. The London detective went towards it. He opened the door and went in, and I was close behind him. There were several men in there, but I was only interested in one. He was standing on the other side of a table.
‘That’s the man who cut off my hair!’ I cried.
He seemed at first like a man who had seen a ghost, but then he said, ‘I wish I had cut your throat!’

The police caught all the thieves. They were wanted all over the world for other robberies. Mr Colegate got his silver back. Mr Bantock, who owned the shop, was someone who bought and sold stolen jewels. He and all the other men in that room were sent to prison.
It took many years for my hair to grow long again, and it never grew as long as before. Each time I looked into a mirror, some of my anger returned.
But the man who cut my hair was stupid. Before he cut it, the rope hurt me badly and I wasn’t interested in what he and his friend were doing or saying. But after he cut it, I was very angry indeed, and so I watched every move which they — and their lips! — made!

Dunstan Thwaite looked at the railway crossing and decided that it was time for John Dunn to die. It was a very suitable place for a murder. There were trees all around, and they hid the trains which came so fast along the railway line. The nearest house was Thwaitite’s own, and this was also hidden by the trees. People and traffic did not use the crossing very often, and the big gates were kept locked. There was a small gate used by passengers going to the station, but at night it was always quiet.

Thwaite was a worried man. He had to use sleeping powders to help him sleep. But after tonight, things were going to be different. The time had come to stop the blackmail. The time had come for John Dunn to die.

It all began five years earlier…

Thwaite worked in the offices of a large company, and his only money was the money that the company paid him. It was not much, but it was enough. Then he met the beautiful Miss Hilda Lorraine and asked her to marry him.

She came from an important family who were supposed to be very rich, but in fact they had less money than Thwaite had thought. He learned that he would have to pay for the wedding himself. And he did not have enough money for the expensive kind of wedding that Miss Lorraine wanted. So Thwaite stole a thousand pounds, by changing the figures in the company’s book. He planned to put the money back after he was married, but someone discovered that it was missing.

Thwaite kept quiet. Another man was thought to be the thief, and he lost his job. Thwaite still said nothing.
But John Dunn worked in the same office. He worked closely with Thwaite and guessed Thwaite’s crime. He searched through the company’s books until he found what he was looking for. Then he went to Thwaite.

‘Sorry to have ask you, Mr Thwaite,’ He said. I need a hundred pounds… for my son. He’s in a bit of trouble , you see…’
‘But you don’t have a son,’ said Thwaite.
And then Thwaite knew that he was being blackmailed.
He paid Dunn one hundred pounds, and Dunn said nothing more for a year. During that time, Thwaite got married.

Then the day came when Dunn asked him for more money.
‘Two hundred and fifty pounds,’ he said to Thwaite.
‘I can’t pay─’ began Thwaite.
But he did. Either he paid or he went to prison.

It went on for five years, and each time Dunn wanted more money. Thwaite found it difficult to live on the money that he was left with. His wife liked expensive things. An expensive house, an expensive car, visit to expensive restaurants. She also discovered that some of money her husband was paid each year seemed to disappear. He tried to lie about it, but he knew that she thought he was paying to keep another woman.

Oh, how he hated John Dunn! Something must happen!
And then he remembered the railway crossing.

It was not a new idea. Weeks before, he had thought about what could happen there. The idea came when the doctor gave him some powders to help him sleep. He thought about giving Dunn enough of them to kill him, but then he got a better idea. Although he was afraid, Thwaite slowly realized that murder was the only answer to his problem.

Then Dunn asked for more money.
‘Five hundred pounds, Mr Thwaite,’ Dunn told him.
‘Five hundred!’ said Thwaite. ‘Why not ask for the moon? You’ll get neither one nor
the other.’
‘Five hundred,’ repeated Dunn, calmly.

It was then that Thwaite decided to murder the other man. He pretended to think about the money for a moment, then he said, ‘Come to my house tomorrow night and we’ll talk.’ He remembered his wife was going to be away in London all night. ‘And bring those papers from the office which you want me to look at.’
‘All right,’ said Dunn.

The following evening, Thwaite put two hundred pounds in his pocket. Then he put half of his sleeping powders into a whisky bottle. There was only enough whisky for two glasses, but there was an unopened bottle next to it. Next he put a hammer into one pocket of his overcoat, and a torch into the other pocket. The coat was outside the door of his study. Lastly, he moved the hands on his watch and on the study clock forward by ten minutes. Those extra ten minutes would give him his alibi.

Thwaite knew that he must be extra careful.
He knew that people at the office thought there was some secret between him and Dunn. A secret that Thwaite didn’t want anyone to know.
‘If Dunn is killed.’ he thought, ‘they’ll wonder if it was really an accident, or if I murdered him.’
But if his plan went well, the police would believe that he hadn’t left the house.

Thwaite sat down to wait for John Dunn. He thought about what he was going to do. Murder! He could almost see his hand holding the hammer above Dunn; could hear the awful sound of it crashing down on to the man’s head. He could see Dunn’s dead body! Dead all except the eyes, which looked at Thwaite… followed him everywhere he went…
He tried to calm himself. He remembered why he was doing this. When Dunn was dead, his problems were over.

Half an hour later, Dunn arrived. Jane opened the door. Jane was the servant who lived in the house with Thwaite and his wife. She brought Dunn into the study.
Thwaite smiled in a friendly way. ‘Oh, good. You’ve brought those papers for me to see, Dunn. Thank you.’
After Jane left, the two men looked at each other.
‘Give me the papers,’ Thwaite said. ‘I’ll look at them now that you’ve brought them.’

Fifteen minutes later, he gave the papers back to Dunn and sat back in his chair.
‘Now, about that other matter.’ He got up. ‘But why not have a drink first?’
‘No, thank you,’ said Dunn. He looked afraid.
‘What are you afraid of?’ said Thwaite. He gave Dunn the opened whisky bottle and two glasses. ‘We can both drink the same whisky, if you like. Here, you do it.’

After a moment, Dunn put whisky into each glass, then he waited until Thwaite drank before he drank his own. Thwaite watched him. How long before the other man began to feel sleepy? Thwaite needed all of one sleeping powder to make him sleep, but Dunn did not usually take them.

‘Listen, Dunn,’ said Thwaite, ‘I haven’t got five hundred pounds, but I can give you this.’ He took the money from his pocket and put it on the table. Dunn counted it. ‘Two hundred?’ he said, with a laugh. ’Are you trying to funny?’
‘I’m not saying it will be the last,’ said Thwaite. ’Take it now and be pleased that you’ve got it.’
Dunn shook his head. ‘Five hundred, Mr. Thwaite.’

‘I’ve told you, I can’t do it,’ said Thwaite. ‘And I won’t do it. You can tell everyone what I did – I don’t care any more. It’s been five years, and I’ve done a lot of good work for the company during that time. I saved them a lot more than a thousand pounds. I’ll go and live in another country and give myself a new name.’
‘And your wife?’ said Dunn.
‘My wife will leave the country first,’ Thwaite told him. ‘She’ll wait for me to come out of prison. It won’t be more than two or three years. So you can take the two hundred pounds, or you can do your worst!’

The powder in the whisky was beginning to make Dunn sleepy. He looked stupidly at Thwaite, and Thwaite began to worry. Had he given the other man too much? He looked at the clock. There was not much time left.

‘Will you take it, or leave it?’ asked Thwaite.
‘Five hundred,’ said Dunn, in a heavy voice. ‘I want five hundred.’
‘You can go and do your worst,’ said Thwaite.
Dunn held out a shaking hand. ‘Come on, pay me.’

Thwaite began to worry again. ‘Are you feeling all right, Dunn? Have some more whisky.’ He opened the other bottle and put some whisky in Dunn’s glass. Dunn drank it, and it seemed to make him feel better.
‘That was strange,’ he said. ‘I didn’t feel very well, but I feel a little better now.’
‘If you’re going to catch your train, you must go,’ said Thwaite. ‘Tell me tomorrow what you finally decide to do. Take the two hundred with you.’

Dunn thought for a moment, then picked up the money. He looked at his watch, then looked at the study clock. ‘Your clock is wrong,’ he said. ‘I have ten more minutes.’
‘Wrong?’ said Thwaite. He looked at his own watch. ‘It’s your watch that’s wrong. Look at mine.’
Dunn looked and seemed unable to understand it. He stood up… and almost fell back again. Thwaite hid a smile. This was how he wanted Dunn to be. ‘You’re not feeling well,’ he said. ‘I’ll take you to the station. Wait until I get my coat.’

Now that the time was here, Thwaite felt cool and calm. He put on his coat, feeling the hammer in the pocket, then went back into the study.
‘We’ll go out this way,’ he said.

There was a side door from the study into the garden. Thwaite closed it silently and it locked automatically behind him. It was his plan to return that way, go in quietly again, and then to change the clock and his watch back to the right time. Then he would shout ‘Goodnight’, and close the front door very loudly, pretending that somebody had left just then. Next, he would call Jane and ask for some coffee, making sure that she saw the clock. Then, if the police asked her later, Jane could say that Thwaite did not leave the house and that Dunn went to catch his train at the right time.

It was a dry night, but very dark. A train carrying freight went slowly by. Thwaite smiled to himself. There were plenty of freight trains at that time of the night. He needed one of them to hide his crime for him. He planned to hit Dunn on the head with the hammer, then put his body on the railway line. A freight train would do the rest.

Slowly, the two men walked on, Thwaite holding Dunn’s arm. A light wind moved among the trees. Thwaite gently pushed the half-asleep Dunn forwards. He put his hand into his pocket for the hammer… And stopped. His keys! They were still inside the house, and he could not get back in without them! He would have to ring the front door bell. His alibi was destroyed! It was a bad mistake. Everything was wrong now. He couldn’t go on with the murder.

‘Most murders make mistake,’ thought Thwaite, trying to claim himself . ‘I’ve been the same.’ But he was shaking with fear as he thought about the mistake. Suddenly, he could not walk another step with Dunn.
‘Goodnight,’ he said to the other man.
And before they reached the crossing, he turned and walked back to the house.

For ten minutes, Thwaite walked up and down outside until he began to feel calm again. Then he rang the bell.
‘Thank you, Jane ,’ he said. ‘I went to see Mr Dunn over the crossing, and I forgot my keys.’
He went to bed a happier man. He was not a murderer.

When he was eating his breakfast the next morning, he decided what to do. ‘I’ll tell them at the office that I stole the thousand pounds,’ he said to himself . ‘I’ll take my punishment, and then I can have some peace again.’
It suddenly seemed so easy. Until Jane came in.

‘Have you heard the news, sir?’ she said. ‘Mr. Dunn was killed by a train on the crossing last night. A man who was working on the railway line found him this morning.’
Thwaite slowly went white. Jane was looking at him strangely. What was she thinking? What story did he tell her the night before? He couldn’t remember!
‘Dunn killed!’ he said. ‘How terrible, Jane! I’ll go down.’ The body was in a small railway building, near the line. There was a policeman outside.

‘A sad accident, Mr Thwaite,’ the policeman said. ‘You knew the man, didn’t you, sir?’
‘He worked in my office,’ replied Thwaite. ‘He was with me last night, discussing business. I suppose this happened on his way home. It’s terrible!’
‘It’s very sad, sir,’ said the policeman. ‘But accidents will happen.’
‘I know that,’ said Thwaite. ‘But I wish he hadn’t drunk so much of my whisky. I was going to walk with him to the station.’
The policeman looked closely at Thwaite. ‘And did you, sir?’ ‘No,’ said Thwasite. ‘The cold night air seemed to make him feel better. I turned back before the crossing.’

The policeman said no more, but later that day two more policemen came to the office. ‘Have they talked to Jane?’ wondered Thwaite. Again he told them, ‘I left Dunn before we reached the railway crossing.’ They wrote down what he said to them, then went away.
Next day, they came back.

There were things that Thwaite could not explain to them. Why did the whisky bottle contain what was left of a sleeping powder? Why was the study clock wrong by ten minutes? (At dinner-time earlier on the same evening, Jane had noticed that it was right.) And why was a hammer found in his overcoat pocket?

Then the police found papers in Dunn’s house. The hand-writing on them was Dunn’s. It told the story of Thwaite and the thousand pounds, and it told how Thwaite was a thief. The police then discovered that money taken from Thwaite’s bank account over the last five years always appeared a few days later in Dunn’s bank book. Lastly, the time of death was known to be 10.30 pm because Dunn’s blood was found on that time. It was also seven minutes before Jane opened the front door to let Thwaite back in…

At first, Thwaite had no answers to all their questions.
Finally, on his last morning, he told them the true story.
Then he went to his death bravely.
